# BASIL IR Interpreter

The interpreter is designed for testing, debugging, and validation of static analyses and code transforms.
This page describes first how it can be used for this purpose, and secondly its design.

## Basic Usage

The interpreter can be invoked from the command line, via the interpret flag, by default this prints a trace and checks that the interpreter
exited on a non-error stop state.

```shell
./mill run -i src/test/correct/indirect_call/gcc/indirect_call.adt -r src/test/correct/indirect_call/gcc/indirect_call.relf --interpret
[INFO]   Interpreter Trace:
         StoreVar(#5,Local,0xfd0:bv64)
         StoreMem(mem,HashMap(0xfd0:bv64 -> 0xf0:bv8, 0xfd6:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd2:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd3:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd4:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd7:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd5:bv64 -> 0x0:bv8, 0xfd1
...
[INFO]   Interpreter stopped normally.
```

The `--verbose` flag can also be used, which may print interpreter trace events as they are executed, but not this may not correspond to the actual
execution trace, and contain additional events not corresponding to the program.
E.g. this shows the memory intialisation events that precede the program execution. This is mainly useful for debugging the interpreter.

### Testing with Interpreter

The interpreter is invoked with `interpret(p: IRContext)` to interpret normally and return an `InterpreterState` object
containing the final state.

#### Traces

There is also, `interpretTrace(p: IRContext)` which returns a tuple of `(InterpreterState, Trace(t: List[ExecEffect]))`,
where the second argument contains a list of all the events generated by the interpreter in order.
This is useful for asserting a stronger equivalence between program executions, but in most cases events describing "unobservable"
behaviour, such as register accesses should be filtered out from this list before comparison.

To see an example of this used to validate the constant prop analysis see [/src/test/scala/DifferentialAnalysisTest.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/test/scala/DifferentialAnalysisTest.scala).

#### BreakPoints

Finally `interpretBreakPoints(p: IRContext, breakpoints: List[BreakPoint])` is used to
run an interpreter and perform additional actions at specified code points. For example, this may be invoked such as:

```scala
val watch = IRWalk.firstInProc((program.procedures.find(_.name == "main")).get).get
val bp = BreakPoint("entrypoint",  BreakPointLoc.CMD(watch), BreakPointAction(saveState=true, stop=true, evalExprs=List(("R0", Register("R0", 64))), log=true))
val res = interpretBreakPoints(program, List(bp))
```

The structure of a breakpoint is as follows:

```scala
case class BreakPoint(name: String = "", location: BreakPointLoc, action: BreakPointAction)

// the place to perform the breakpoint action
enum BreakPointLoc:
  case CMD(c: Command)                      // at a command c
  case CMDCond(c: Command, condition: Expr) // at a command c, when condition evaluates to TrueLiteral

// describes what to do when the breakpoint is triggered
case class BreakPointAction(
    saveState: Boolean = true,                // stash the state of the interpreter
    stop: Boolean = false,                    // stop the interpreter with an error state
    evalExprs: List[(String, Expr)] = List(), // Evaluate the rhs of the list of expressions, and stash them (lhs is an arbitrary human-readable name)
    log: Boolean = false                      // Print a log message about passing the breakpoint describing the results of this action
)
```

To see an example of this used to validate the constant prop analysis see [/src/test/scala/InterpretTestConstProp.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/test/scala/InterpretTestConstProp.scala).

### Resource Limit

This kills the interpreter in an error state once a specified instruction count is reached, to avoid the interpreter running forever on infinite loops.

It can be used simply with the function `interptretRLimit`, this automatically ignores the initialisation instructions.

```scala
def interpretRLimit(p: IRContext, instructionLimit: Int) : InterpreterState
```

It can also be combined with other interpreters as shown:

```scala
def interp(p: IRContext, instructionLimit: Int) : (InterpreterState, Trace) = {
  val interpreter = LayerInterpreter(tracingInterpreter(NormalInterpreter), EffectsRLimit(instructionLimit))
  val initialState = InterpFuns.initProgState(NormalInterpreter)(p, InterpreterState())
  BASILInterpreter(interpreter).run((initialState, Trace(List())), 0)._1
}
```

## Implementation / Code Structure

### Summary

-  [BitVectorEval.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/blob/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/BitVectorEval.scala)
    - Evaluation of bitvector operations, throws `IllegalArgumentException` on violation of contract
      (e.g negative divisor, type mismatch)
-  [ExprEval.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/ExprEval.scala)
    - Evaluation of expressions, defined in terms of partial evaluation down to a Literal
    - This can also be used to evaluate expressions in static analyses, by passing a function to query variable assignments and memory state from the value domain.
-  [Interpreter.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/Interpreter.scala)
    - Definition of core `Effects[S, E]` and `Interpreter[S, E]` types describing state transitions in
      the interpreter
    - Instantiation/definition of `Effects` for concrete state `InterpreterState`
-  [InterpreterProduct.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpreterProduct.scala)
    - Definition of product and layering composition of generic `Effects[S, E]`s interpreters
-  [InterpretBasilIR.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpretBasilIR.scala)
    - Definition of `Eval` object defining expression evaluation in terms of `Effects[S, InterpreterError]`
    - Definition of `Interpreter` instance for BASIL IR, using a generic `Effects` instance and concrete state.
    - Definition of ELF initialisation in terms of generic `Effects[S, InterpreterError]`
-  [InterpretBreakpoints.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpretBreakpoints.scala)
    - Definition of a generic interpreter with a breakpoint checker layered on top
-  [interpretRLimit.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpretRLimit.scala)
    - Definition of layered interpreter which terminates after a specified cycle count
-  [InterpretTrace.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpretTrace.scala)
    - Definition of a generic interpreter which records a trace of calls to the `Effects[]` instance.

### Explanation

The interpreter is structured for compositionality, at its core is the `Effects[S, E]` type, defined in [Interpreter.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/Interpreter.scala).
This type defines a small set of functions which describe all the possible state transformations, over a concrete state `S`, and error type `E` (always `InterpreterError` in practice).

This is implemented using the state Monad, `State[S,V,E]` where `S` is the state, `V` the value, and `E` the error type.
This is a flattened `State[S, Either[E]]`, defined in [util/functional/State.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/blob/main/src/main/scala/util/functional/State.scala).
`Effects` methods return delayed computations, functions from an input state (`S`) to a resulting state and a value (`(S, Either[E, V])`).
These are sequenced using `flatMap` (monad bind), or the `for{} yield()` syntax sugar for flatMap.

This `Effects[S, E]` is instantiated for a given concrete state, the main example of which is `NormalInterpreter <: Effects[InterpreterState, InterpreterError]`,
also defined in `Interpreter.scala`. The memory component of the state is abstracted further into the `MemoryState` object.

The actual execution of code is defined on top of this, in the `Interpreter[S, E]` type, which takes an instance of the `Effects` by parameter,
and defines both the small step (`interpretOne`) over on instruction, and the fixed point to termination from some in initial state in `run()`.
The fact that the stepping is defined outside the effects is important, as it allows concrete states, and state transitions over them to be
composed somewhat arbitrarily, and the interpretatation of the language compiled down to calls to resulting instance of `Effects`.

This is defined in [InterpretBasilIR.scala](https://github.com/UQ-PAC/BASIL/tree/main/src/main/scala/ir/eval/InterpretBasilIR.scala). `BASILInterpreter` defines an
`Interpreter` over an arbitrary instance of `Effects[S, InterpreterError]`, encoding BASIL IR commands as effects.
This file also contains definitions of the initial memory state setup of the interpreter, based on the ELF sections and symbol table.

### Composition of interpreters

There are two ways to compose `Effects`, product and layer. Both produce an instance of `Effects[(L, R), E]`,
where `L` and `R` are the concrete state types of the two Effects being composed.

Product runs the two effects, over two different concrete state types, simultaneously without interaction.

Layer runs the `before` effect first, and passes its state to the `inner` effect whose value is returned.

```scala
case class ProductInterpreter[L, T, E](val inner: Effects[L, E], val before: Effects[T, E]) extends Effects[(L, T), E] {
case class LayerInterpreter[L, T, E](val inner: Effects[L, E], val before: Effects[(L, T), E])
```

Examples of using these are in the `interpretTrace` and `interpretWithBreakPoints` interpreters respectively.

Note, this only works by the aforementioned requirement that all effect calls come from outside the `Effects[]`
instance itself. In the simple case, the `Interpreter` instance is the only object calling `Effects`.
This means, `Effects` triggered by an inner `Effects[]` instance do not flow back to the `ProductInterpreter`,
but only appear from when `Interpreter` above the `ProductInterpreter` interprets the program via effect calls.
For this reason if, for example, `NormalInterpreter` makes effect calls they will not appear in a trace emitted by `interptretTrace`.

### Note on memory space initialisation

Most of the interpret functions are overloaded such that there is a version taking a program `interpret(p: Program)`,
and a version taking `IRContext`. The variant taking IRContext uses the ELF symbol information to initialise the
memory before interpretation. If you are interpreting a real program (i.e. not a synthetic example created through
the DSL), this is most likely required.

We initialise:

- The general interpreter state, stack and memory regions, stack pointer, a symbolic mapping from addresses functions
- The initial and readonly memory sections stored in Program
- The `.bss` section to zero
- The relocation table. Each listed offset is stored an address to either a real procedure in the program, or a
  location storing a symbolic function pointer to an intrinsic function.

`.bss` is generally the top of the initialised data, the ELF symbol `__bss_end__` being equal to the symbol `__end__`.
Above this we can somewhat choose arbitrarily where to put things, usually the heap is above, followed by
dynamically linked symbols, then the stack. There is currently no stack overflow checking, or heap implemented in the
interpreter.

Unfortunately these details are defined by the load-time linker and the system's linker script, and it is hard to find a good description
of their behaviour. Some details are described here https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/elf/elf.pdf, and here
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2983990.2983996.

### Missing features

- There is functionality to implement external function calls via intrinsics written in Scala code, but currently only
  basic printf style functions are implemented as no-ops. These can be extended to use a file IO abstraction, where
  a memory region is created for each file (e.g. stdout), with a variable to keep track of the current write-point
  such that a file write operation stores to the write-point address, and increments it by the size of the store.
  Importantly, an implementation of malloc() and free() is needed, which can implement a simple greedy allocation
  algorithm.
- Despite the presence of procedure parameters in the current IR, they are not used for by the boogie translation and
  are hence similarly ignored in the interpreter.
- The interpreter's immutable state representation is motivated by the ability to easily implement a sound approach
  to non-determinism, e.g. to implement GoTos with guessing and rollback rather than look-ahead. This is more
  useful for checking specification constructs than executing real programs, so is not yet implemented.
- The trace does not clearly distinguish internal vs external calls, or observable
  and non-observable behaviour.
- While the interpreter semantics supports memory regions, we do not initialise the memory regions (or the initial memory state)
  based on those present in the program, we simply assume a flat `mem` and `stack` memory partitioning.


